Risks and causes of liver cancer

Your risk of developing cancer depends on many factors. These include
your age, genetics, lifestyle and environmental factors.

Anything that can increase your risk of cancer is called a risk factor.

Primary liver cancer is uncommon in the UK, but rates are increasing.
There are some factors that are known to increase your risk. Having one
or more of the below risk factors doesn't mean that you'll definitely
develop liver cancer.

Getting older

Although liver cancer can happen at any age, it is most common in older
people. Most people diagnosed are over the age of 60. The highest rates
are in 85 to 89 year olds.

Liver cirrhosis

Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver due to previous damage. This scarring
can cause problems with the way the liver works.

Having cirrhosis increases your risk of getting liver cancer
(hepatocellular carcinoma or HCC). The risk varies depending on the
cause of the cirrhosis. Cirrhosis can be caused by:

-   long term infection with a virus such as hepatitis B or C

-   long term alcohol drinking

-   inherited diseases such as iron overload disorder (haemochromatosis)
    and alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency

-   non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

-   primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC)

Smoking

Smoking increases your risk of many different cancers, including liver
cancer.

The risk of liver cancer is increased further if you smoke and drink a
lot of alcohol. The risk might also be higher in people who smoke and
have hepatitis B or C infection.

20 out of 100 cases of liver cancer in the UK are caused by smoking.

Body weight

Being overweight or obese increases the risk of liver cancer. Diabetes
and non alcoholic fatty liver disease (see below) are more common in
people who are overweight. So this may partly explain the link.

More than 20 out of 100 cases of liver cancer (20%) in the UK are caused
by being overweight or obese.

Alcohol

Heavy alcohol use increases your risk of liver cancer. Drinking alcohol
long term can cause cirrhosis of the liver. Cirrhosis in turn increases
the risk of liver cancer. Alcohol might also directly damage the DNA
inside liver cells.

The risk of liver cancer is higher in heavy drinkers who have hepatitis
B or C virus infections compared to those who drink moderate amounts of
alcohol or don\'t drink at all.

7 out of 100 cases of liver cancer (7%) in the UK are caused by drinking
alcohol.

Non alcoholic fatty liver disease

Having non alcoholic fatty liver disease increases your risk of liver
cancer.

Non alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a group of conditions
including mild hepatic steatosis and non alcoholic steatohepatitis. In
these conditions fat builds up in the liver. The fat causes inflammation
and damage, which might lead to cirrhosis. Non alcoholic fatty liver
disease is common in people who have a group of symptoms (called
metabolic syndrome). These include:

-   having extra weight around the waist

-   using insulin less effectively than normal

-   high blood pressure

-   high levels of fat in the blood

Infection with hepatitis viruses

Long term infection with the hepatitis B or C virus increases the risk
of developing primary liver cancer. This is mainly because these viruses
cause damage to the liver (cirrhosis).

Drinking alcohol when you have hepatitis B or C can further increase
your risk of liver cancer.

Diabetes

People with diabetes have a higher risk of liver cancer than people who
do not have diabetes. The higher risk may be due to the higher levels of
insulin in people with diabetes or due to liver damage caused by the
diabetes. The risk may be increased more in people who have other risk
factors such as liver cirrhosis and hepatitis infection.

Some treatments for diabetes such as metformin may reduce the risk of
liver cancer.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or AIDS

Studies have shown that people with HIV or AIDS have an increased risk
of liver cancer. This might be because they have low immunity, which
means the body is less able to fight infection. So they are less likely
to clear a hepatitis B or C infection, which can cause cirrhosis.

Aflatoxin

Aflatoxin is a substance found in foods such as:

-   mouldy peanuts

-   wheat

-   soya beans

-   groundnuts

-   corn

-   rice

People from Africa and Asia who have eaten these over a long period of
time have an increased risk of developing liver cancer. The risk is
increased further in people who also have chronic hepatitis B infection.

Betel quid

There is some evidence that people who chew betel quid have an increased
risk of liver cancer. Betel quid is a combination of betel leaf, areca
nut and slaked lime. It may also contain tobacco. There is some evidence
that betel quid, even without the tobacco causes liver cancer. But more
research is needed.

Gallstones or gallbladder removal

People may have an increased risk of liver cancer if they:

-   have had gallstones before, or

-   had their gallbladder removed (cholecystectomy)

The increased risk may be due to raised pressure in the bile duct. This
causes long term inflammation in the liver tissue.

Chemicals

There is evidence that exposure to the chemical vinyl chloride increases
liver cancer risk. There is also limited evidence that exposure to other
chemicals such as arsenic and trichloroethylene may increase risk.
People may come into contact with these chemicals through their work.

Family history

People with a family history of liver cancer may have an increased risk
of developing it themselves. This might be due to genetic or shared
environmental factors.

Liver flukes (parasitic worms)

Liver flukes are infections caused by parasites. These infections can
increase your risk of liver cancer. They are usually caused by eating
contaminated food or drinking contaminated water. They are not common in
the UK.

For detailed information on risk factors for liver cancer

We have more detailed information for health professionals about liver
cancer risks and causes.

Other possible causes

There are often stories about potential causes in the media. It isn't
always clear which ideas are supported by evidence. There might be
things you have heard of that we haven't included here. This is because
either there is no evidence about them, or it is less clear.
